[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I was not looking, I was
not seeking for a visionary
experience.
It began for me in a
very spontaneous way.
But over the next four years
of living on my farm in Hawaii,
these visionary
experiences continued,
and I found my conscious
awareness continually drawn
into the connection
with this man's mind.
>> We have a spellbinding
tale to tell you today.
A very exciting guest.
His name is Dr. Hank Wesselman,
and he has written two books.
The first one you
may have heard of.
It came out a little while
ago, called "Spiritwalker."
And the second one
is "Medicinemaker."
Dr. Hank Wesselman is a
anthropologist and a mystic.
And we welcome you--
>> Thank you very much.
>> --on the Wisdom Channel.
Hank, for those of us who
are a little hazy on this,
what is an anthropologist?
What do you do?
>> Well, anthropology is
divided into four major fields,
largely for research purposes.
The first is physical
anthropology.
And physical
anthropology is primarily
concerned with
investigating human beings
as a biological
phenomenon, reconstructing
the evolutionary history of
our species on the one hand,
and accounting for the
human variation that
exists from place to
place around the Earth.
The second major
field is archaeology.
And archaeology is concerned
with material culture,
with the evolution of culture.
It adds a time dimension
to the culture.
Archaeologists are
concerned with anything
that our ancestors produced.
And in the same way that
the physical anthropologist
is concerned with
reconstructing stages
of human biological
evolution, the archaeologist
is concerned with
reconstructing stages
of human cultural evolution.
The third major
field is linguistics,
because human culture
rests on language.
It's the medium through which
I'm talking with you right now.
And so anthropologists are
very concerned with language,
both in the descriptive
way sociolinguistics
is concerned with language
and social relationships
and historical linguistics,
the evolution of the languages
that we speak today.
And then finally,
cultural anthropology
is the study of contemporary
modern human cultures
on the one hand and the
study of the underlying
patterns within human
cultures on the other.
Those are known as
ethnography on the one hand
and ethnology on the other.
>> Now, which one are you?
>> I'm actually a biological
anthropologist because I
started out life as a biologist
at the University of Colorado
then did my doctoral work in
anthropology at UC Berkeley.
It was when I was
there that I began
to work as part of
an international team
of scientists,
investigating the earlier
stages of human evolution out
in the Rift Valley in Africa.
This is work I began
back in the 1970s,
and I still do this work today.
>> And you're a professor
also, with several--
>> Well, I'm an instructor
at several colleges.
>> I'm interested in the type of
work you're doing in Ethiopia.
I understand that, in
the last couple of years,
that you were part
of a team that
discovered a fossil that may
be the missing link between ape
and man.
>> But we haven't said too
much about this discovery yet.
What can I tell you?
Well, in 1994, I got the call
from one of my colleagues
to come out to Ethiopia to
go out on expedition to do
the specialty work that I do.
One of the things that
I do as I reconstruct
the paleo environments of
early science at the time they
were laid down.
While I was in the field, over
a roughly 18, 19-day period,
we uncovered about
half of a skeleton
of an early kind of
protohuman, which
is so primitive that we're
speculating that it could,
in fact, be the missing
link between humans and apes
that Charles Darwin predicted
we would eventually find.
>> So it is more
advanced than an ape?
>> Well, it's more human than
an ape, but it's still very,
very primitive.
It's a million and
a half years older
than the famous Lucy find,
for those of your listeners
who know about Lucy.
Lucy was discovered
by Don Johanson
and his graduate
student Tom Gray
about 25 years ago out in
Hadar, about 60 kilometers,
70 kilometers northwest of
where we're working today.
This was the most
exciting find of its kind
at the time it was made because
Lucy, as many people know,
represents about 40%
of a skeleton of a very
early kind of human called
Australopithecus afarensis.
>> But this one you're
working on is even older.
>> It's a million and a
half years older than Lucy.
It's roughly 4 and
1/2 million years old.
So it's very exciting.
>> I wanted to kind of set the
stage here for the fact that
you really are
kind of an egghead.
You're a scientist.
>> I'm a mainstream
scientist, it's true.
>> And then you have written
these absolutely startling
books.
What happened?
>> I was in my 40s, and I
began to have classic visionary
experience.
Now, these experiences actually
began earlier in my life,
but at that time I had
no idea what they were.
As an anthropologist,
though, I knew
that in traditional
societies there
are individuals
called shamans who
are masters of trance,
who are masters
of the visionary experience.
And when I began to
have these experiences
I suspected that I was
literally journeying,
like the traditional
tribal shaman journeys
when they do the work that they
do on behalf of other people,
usually.
I think it was because
of this knowledge
that I had as an anthropologist
that I didn't turn myself over
to the medical profession,
to the psychiatric types.
You know, what
can I say, I began
to have these very strange,
dreamlike experiences which
were super real.
At the same time,
my body was invaded
with these strange
sensations of power or force
that would render my physical
aspect completely rigid
like a stick of wood.
Now, I wondered if this
was sleep paralysis,
and many of your
listeners probably
know about sleep paralysis--
this state where we come out
of sleep, sometimes 4:00 or
5:00 o'clock in the morning,
and we can't move.
Our body is
completely paralyzed,
and we're very much
aware, very much awake.
Often, we're having
what are sometimes
called hypnagogic
hallucinations,
dreamlike experiences,
which are very real.
In my case, I was
living in Hawaii
on my farm, which I
purchased many years ago when
you could still buy
agricultural real estate
for a reasonable price.
And I had one of these
classic visionary experiences
in which I found myself merged
with the mind of another man.
>> Can you say that again?
>> All right.
To go through the
stages, the body
became paralyzed with these
incredible sensations of power.
I saw these curious
visual hallucinations--
spots, lines, zigzags,
a curious crescent
which began to open, the
suggestion of a grid,
some sort of vast grid, kind
of like flying into Chicago
at night.
And then suddenly it was gone.
And I found myself looking
out at a world which
was beyond my imagining.
I was looking out at
this very strange scene
as though I were looking
out the window of a house.
And then as I looked
around I realized
I was actually inside
a house, looking out
a window at this incredible
tropical rainforest
across this large expanse
of cleared fields.
I was literally in
somebody else's body.
>> So this is like
spirit possession,
only you were the possessor.
>> You could say that.
It could be said that way.
I was merged in some way
with the conscious awareness
of another man.
>> What did you see?
>> Well, I was looking out at
his world through his eyes.
And at the same
time, I became aware
of his cognitive pattern,
his thoughts, his emotions,
his feelings, his
judgments, impressions,
memories of his past,
coming up in a kind
of multilayered
complex, very much
the way it is when one
of us you know sort of
goes through, you know, a
moment-to-moment daily basis
type experience where
you're thinking,
remembering, judging, and
receiving impressions.
It was very much like this,
except he was him and I was me.
>> This was the
interesting part.
This is not a contemporary.
This is someone that you're
looking through the eyes
of someone far in the future.
>> That's what makes
it really sticky.
I learned very quickly
that this man doesn't
live in our slice of time.
He lives in the future.
And in looking
into his memories I
discovered, in this
interesting first experience,
that within a very
short period of time
if I wanted to know something,
it would appear in his mind
and in my mind simultaneously.
If I wanted him to
look at something,
there would be a
millisecond of delay
and he would sort of walk
over and look at something
and study it.
In some way, which
I didn't understand,
his subconscious mind
did not distinguish
between directives from his
conscious mind or from mine.
>> So he didn't know you
were there right away?
>> He didn't.
Now, to say I was surprised
would be an understatement
of vast proportions.
I was stunned.
I didn't know what to do.
Fortunately, I'd had some
experience with zen meditation,
with Buddhism, and I was
able to become completely
still and watch, like
a witness almost.
And in this particular
instance, the very first time
I connected with
him, I found myself
merged with this individual for
roughly 18 hours of his time.
And during this time, I was able
to receive a lot of information
about him, who he is, about
his world, about his culture,
about the world that he lives
in, through his memories.
And I learned, for
example, that he
is the descendant
of voyagers who
came to the Western
coast of North America.
>> Hold that thought.
I hate to do this to
you just at this point.
We have to take a break.
But don't go away.
You don't want to miss 1 minute
of this fabulous, spellbinding
story.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're talking to
Dr. Hank Wesselman,
who is the author of two
very, very interesting books.
The first one is "Spiritwalker"
and his latest book,
"Medicinemaker."
Welcome back, Hank.
>> Thank you.
>> You left us hanging here.
>> I left you hanging.
In this very first
connection with this man,
I was very curious
as to who he was,
and I learned a
great deal about him
and the history of his
people through his memories.
Because this man is
interested in history,
I learned that he
lives in a time which
is, roughly speaking, 240
some odd generations after--
After what?
There's an instance in the
past, an incident that happened,
which he thinks of as the fall.
And what this was,
apparently, was the collapse
of Western civilization.
He lives in a time, roughly--
If you convert 247 generations
into 20 years per generation,
it comes out to
roughly 5,000 years.
This man, if my
calculations are correct,
lives roughly 5,000
years from now.
>> So you're looking
out of this man's eyes.
Where is he, and
what do you see?
>> Well, he's living on the
Western coast of North America.
He knows this.
He's living in a part of
the world which today we
call California.
But the redwoods and the oaks
and the grasslands are gone.
The chaparral-covered
hills are gone.
And in their place is this
well-developed tropical forest
of really truly
immense proportions.
I've spent, as an
anthropologist, a lot of time
in tropical regions
of the world,
and I've seen
tropical rainforest.
And this looks to me
like tropical forest.
Now, if this is in
fact California,
and I believe that
it is, it reveals
that the worst case scenario
for the greenhouse warming
has apparently happened.
And there's been a biome shift
in which the tropical regions
of the world have expanded
out of the tropics
and into the temperate regions,
with the temperate regions
being displaced
further to the north.
It seems that there has been
a worldwide climatic shift
and that he is living
in the greenhouse world.
Now, up until this moment, I
knew about greenhouse warming,
but I wasn't particularly
interested in it.
At this point, I became
very interested in it,
and I began to read the
scientific literature
about this very important
issue, in my opinion.
Of course, this was 10
years ago, 15 years ago when
this actually began for me.
Today, of course, we're
seeing the results
of what has been happening
over the last 10 or 15 years.
And it appears that this
greenhouse phenomenon
is very much in process.
And, in my opinion, it's
very disturbing information,
very critical.
>> What has happened
to California?
>> California has been
inundated by a rising sea,
which has filled the
Central Valley with water.
So that the Central
Valley of California,
the San Joaquin Valley
today, is what Ninoa--
this man's name is Ninoa.
It's what Ninoa thinks of is
the Inland Sea, surrounded
by a long archipelago
of islands to the west
and a mountainous unexplored
region to the east.
In this very first instance
of connecting with him,
he was in the process of
leaving his community.
This is a community not unlike
the feudalistic society that
existed in Hawaii in the past.
He is the descendant
of Hawaiian voyagers
who arrived on the coast roughly
130 years before his time.
And he's leaving on a
voyage of exploration
into the lost,
well, you could say,
the interior of the lost
continent of America.
This is how he thinks about it.
When this first
episode came to an end,
I found myself my conscious
awareness returning
to my own physical aspect,
which was lying in bed
next to my wife in Hawaii.
And I literally lay
there in bed in shock
for the best part of
an hour, wondering
what had just happened to me.
My first thought was that
I might be going crazy,
because in my world of
straight science, you know--
You know, I'm not one
of those people that
studied for decades at the
knees of the wisdom masters,
practicing meditation and
yoga, hoping for visions
and transcendent experiences.
I was not looking,
I was not seeking,
for visionary experience.
It began for me in a
very spontaneous way.
But over the next four years
of living on my farm in Hawaii
these visionary
experiences continued.
And I found my conscious
awareness continually drawn
into the connection
with this man's mind.
Then there came an interesting
moment where he had a dream.
And in his dream, he found
his mind drawn backwards,
and he found
himself in the mind,
in the body, of a man
who was living in Hawaii.
All right.
It was me.
And after this experience,
his very first hit--
It's interesting,
just talking about it
I have chicken skin all over me,
like the Hawaiians would say.
His very first hit
was that he had
connected with the spirit
of one of his ancestors.
Now, as I say that to
you, at that moment,
this whole dynamic
shifted for me.
I had never considered the
fact that this man might
be one of my descendants,
or even that he might
be one of my descendant selves.
Uh huh.
It threw the whole thing into an
entirely new framework for me,
to regard this man as
a possible descendant.
And it's quite interesting
because a number of folks
have pointed out to
me that I didn't start
having these
visionary experiences
until my wife Jill was
pregnant with our first child.
So it's almost as
though there had
to be some sort of genetic
contribution to the future
which I had committed myself
to, and then something locked
into place and it began.
It's almost as though it
became possible at that moment.
>> Why you?
>> Why me?
Why me, lord?
You know, I used to wonder
this at the beginning.
I don't know.
"Spiritwalker" is
the study, it's
really the story, of
my initiation crisis--
a classic initiation crisis.
And it was very much like
a crisis in the sense
that I lost all my bearings.
I found myself wandering
aimlessly, kind of sleepwalking
through my life, looking at
things with entirely new eyes,
seeing with entirely new eyes.
"Spiritwalker" is my
initiation crisis.
"Medicinemaker," the second
book, documents my recovery
when I came back to California.
Why me?
I had a chance to cross trails
with a traditional Hawaiian
kahuna many years later.
And I posed that
question to her.
I downloaded some of
this story to her.
And it was very interesting
because she looked at me
and she said, you
know, Dr. Hank,
you may never fully understand
why you had these experiences.
She said, most
people who vision,
most people who have the
deep mystic experience,
for most of them the deep
prayer is a silent one.
Those were her words.
And of course, what she was
saying was that most people
cannot take this raw material
of this particular dimension
and translate it into a form
which is meaningful for others.
In my case, she said, now, look.
She said, you may
never understand
why you had these experiences,
but it's very tempting
to say that you had
them for a reason.
Because look, you've
got a PhD from Berkeley,
you've got credentials,
you're a mainstream scientist,
you're a teacher, you're
a writer, you can talk,
you can communicate.
She said, I think
you've been given
this information for a reason.
Then we had a very long
conversation, some of which
is documented in
"Medicinemaker,"
about the nature of people
who can see the future
and how they very often
come into relationship
with certain spirits.
And in Hawaii, of
course, that spirit
was Pele, the
volcano goddess, who
often came into contact
with visionaries-- what
are called "kaula" in Hawaiian.
She said, it's very
tempting to think
that you have been given this
information for a reason.
So she said, your job is
to go back to your computer
and write this as
it really happened.
>> I understand you were going
to write this as fiction.
>> I was.
Well, it's fantastic
when you think about it.
Time traveling.
You know, it's virtually
100 years ago that H.G.
Wells wrote "The Time Machine"--
almost 100 years ago to the day.
Now, I read that
when I was a boy,
but I never in a
million years would
have thought that such a
phenomenon like time traveling
might actually be possible.
And one of the things I've
tried to do in these books
is come from the position
of both the scientist
and the mystic.
>> What do your
colleagues think of this?
>> My colleagues.
My colleagues are strangely
silent about all of this,
possibly because I work
with them and they know me.
I'm also sitting on a lot of
data, and they want my data.
It will be easiest for them
not to say anything at all,
I think.
In fact, I myself did this
when I was a graduate student
in anthropology.
And people would ask me
about Castaneda's work.
I was very much
aware of the fact
that Castaneda
was controversial.
And I avoided reading
his books for years
because it kind of put me off.
You know, people
would say, oh, what
do you think about
Castaneda's work?
And I took the easy way out.
I said, you know, I haven't read
his books so I can't comment.
And I think that
most of my colleagues
will do that with
my books, as well.
That's just a guess, though.
We'll see.
>> Well, I'll tell you, both of
these books are so fascinating.
It's like an adventure tale.
>> Well, life is an adventure.
>> We cannot put them down
once we get started with them.
Hank Wesselman.
Dr. Hank Wesselman, a most
extraordinary gentleman
who has written two books.
The first one is "Spiritwalker,
Messages from the Future."
And the second one,
"Medicinemaker,
Mythic Encounters
on a Shaman's Path."
Absolutely fabulous and
quite controversial.
We bring you miracles
on this show.
Keep coming back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]